---
layout: post
comments: false
title: Peer to Peer Basics
date: 2017-09-06 10:52:34 +0000
description: 'Get started...'
categories:
- network
tags:
- peer-to-peer
- introduction
headline: ...
modified: ''
---
## Intro

Peer to Peer technology implies that at some level requests from one node are
served by another node instead of a server. These nodes are called peers because
of their status in the network thus the name peer to peer.


## Three architectures

1. Centralized Directory
2. Query Flooding
3. Exploiting Heterogeneity

### Centralized Directory

Depends on a central server to provide a directory service. This means that all
peers have to send the central server their IP and the files they have. The
server manages all requests answering with a list of IP addresses which can
satisfy the request.

The main disadvantage is the central server is the single point of failure.
Additionally the server needs to do a health check on the peers.

Using a High Availability infrastructure for the central server should be enough
to diminish the risk of a single point of failure.     

* Napster used this architecture to distribute Mp3s.

### Query Flooding

This architecture connects peers through an overlay network. Which means that
each peer is now also considered a node and each connection an edge which
results in a graph structure.

When a peer send a request this gets sent to all it's neighbors and if none can
satisfy it they then send it to their neighbors which is were the name comes
from as it floods it's network with the request query. Once it is found some
meta data is sent back and if multiple hits occur then one peer needs to be
selected.

The main disadvantage with this method is the increase of network traffic, its
not taken lightly either as some ISPs have gone to the extent of banning these
applications in the past.

* Gnutella was the first application to use this method.

### Exploiting Heterogeneity

This method is basically a hybrid between the Centralized Directory and the
Query Flooding methods. It uses the first of them to connect supernodes, which
are nodes that have a higher priority and resources, the latter connects peers
and assignes them to a supernode where they report connectivity, IP and
resources.

* KaZaA is the main user of this architecture.

----


{% highlight javascript linenos %}
const http = require('http');

const hostname = '127.0.0.1';
const port = 3000;

const server = http.createServer((req, res) => {
  res.statusCode = 200;
  res.setHeader('Content-Type', 'text/plain');
  res.end('Hello World!\n');
});

server.listen(port, hostname, () => {
  console.log(`Server running at http://${hostname}:${port}/`);
});
{% endhighlight %}



## Final Thoughts

...


## Reference

[1] Dhamija, Arushi. “P2P(Peer To Peer) File Sharing.” GeeksforGeeks, 14 Feb.
2018, www.geeksforgeeks.org/p2ppeer-to-peer-file-sharing/.
